EARLY WEARABLES 
When we hear the word “wearable” today, we likely think of fashion accessories, such as watches or bracelets, that track our activities. However, we might trace wearables back to electro-mobile jewellery, or bijoux électro-mobiles, made in Paris by Gustave Trouvé (a French engineer and clockmaker) and Auguste-Germain Cadet-Picard (a French jeweller) during the 1860s. Among these pieces were skull stick-pins, whose eyes and jaws moved with help from electromagnets and pocket batteries. The pins held together neckties (“cravats”) typically worn by men. 

ELECTROMAGNETS
Electro-mobile skulls were driven by mechanisms similar to those found in electromagnetic “interrupter bells.” During the 1860s, these mechanisms were found in doorbells, alarms, and telegraphs. Later they were used in telephones, too. When triggered by a button, they would play a continuous sound. Experiments with them, and thus with electro-mobile skulls, were informed by an electromagnetic worldview emerging during the second half of the nineteenth century. Such a worldview posited electromagnetism as the basis for all scientific inquiry—and therefore for understanding nature. To work with electromagnets was to manipulate life itself.

MOURNING 
Skull stick-pins may remind people of mourning jewellery common in Europe during the 1860s. Mourning jewellery was a gesture of respect toward the dead, but it was also a memento mori: a reminder of mortality and transience. Wearing it was regulated by decree and etiquette. There were stages of mourning as well as acceptable mourning jewellery colours, usually white, black, and gold. Worn after the death of Albert, Prince Consort, Queen Victoria’s jet black jewellery is the most iconic moment in Victorian mourning culture. In this context, an electro-mobile skull is a pun on memento mori: with its snapping jaw, death literally reminds people of itself. Perhaps it is also a joke directed at severe expressions of mourning. 
 
GENDER
Alongside the popularity of mourning jewellery during the 1860s, men routinely wore—and were expected to wear—stick-pins, rings, cuff-links, and neckwear. An electro-mobile skull exaggerated such conventions through novelty. While it may have secured a tie, it was ultimately a conversation piece, which brushed against cultural norms that sternly discouraged experimental dress. In etiquette guides, women were encouraged to avoid “false jewellery,” and men were advised against elaborate styles. Extravagance was associated with a lack of refinement or taste. 

MINIATURE
Trouvé’s training in clockmaking and miniaturization influenced the design of early wearables. Composed of gold, enamel, and diamonds, electro-mobile skulls were less than two centimeters in diameter. Making a tiny electromagnet and then inserting it into such a small space demanded a considerable amount of skill. For this reason, the skulls were frequently described in terms of craft and mastery. Time, fashion, and even death were all at the fingertips to be contained and controlled. Such mastery has a long tradition in the history of technology as masculine culture. 

ORIENTALISM
Like many nineteenth-century engineers, Trouvé and Cadet-Picard redeployed Wolfgang von Kempelen’s orientalist construction of the chess-playing “Mechanical Turk” automaton (1770). Seemingly powered by gears, the automaton was actually manipulated by a human hiding inside it. The automaton drew on Christian views of Muslims as docile, machine-like followers of strict religious codes. For white audiences, it also relegated threats of automata, as heretical bodies without souls, to oriental figures who were not considered human. In his illustrations during the 1860s, Trouvé presented versions of early wearables that followed von Kempelen’s orientalist themes and mechanics. Two such illustrations were described as “Turk’s heads.” 

CLASS
Although upper-class men of the 1860s were considered underdressed without jewellery, electro-mobile skulls were intended for middle-class merchants and entrepreneurs, who could afford novelties but were not aristocrats. While the growing middle class blurred rigid divides between upper and lower classes, etiquette literature from the period suggests they were still expected to conform to ideals of refined behaviour and to dress according to their station. From this point of view, electro-mobile skulls were whimsical and even frivolous. They hyperbolized ideals and played with expectations.  

PERFORMANCE
Designed to entertain, electro-mobile skulls were linked to performance. When wearers manipulated batteries concealed in their pockets, the skulls moved their eyes and gnashed their teeth. Such novelty sparked fascination, especially at the Exposition universelle in Paris (1867). Later, Trouvé’s illuminated jewellery pieces (1880s) were featured in theatrical performances and music hall productions. In ballet électriques, women wore electric costumes and glittering accessories—all designed by Trouvé. While illuminated jewellery heightened dramatic elements of performance, wearing electricity risked burns and other injuries. It also conformed to gender norms, with men exhibiting their innovations on women’s bodies, which were exoticized in the process.
